Add 475 release notes (#25606)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-475.md

# Release 475 (16 Apr 2025)

## General

* Publish additional metrics for input tables in event listener. ({issue}`25475`)
* Expose dynamic filter statistics in the `QueryCompletedEvent`. ({issue}`25575`)

> * Improve scalability of inline data encoding in the parallel client protocol. ({issue}`25439`)

Author: @wendigo, what does "scalability" mean in this context?

Reviewer: Previously the inlined segment was produced on the coordinator meaning that Pages were converted to JSON and eventually compressed there. Now, the inline segment is encoded and compressed on the worker nodes and coordinator is just passing bytes back to the client. This reduces the amount of CPU used on the coordinator when data is being inlined.

Reviewer 2: In the docs we still call it the spooling protocol..

* Improve performance of queries involving the `exclude_columns` table function. ({issue}`25117`)
* Disallow dropping they `system` catalog. ({issue}`24745`)
* Fix occasional query failures when adaptive planning is enabled. ({issue}`25411`)
* Fix incorrect results when using window functions with `DISTINCT`. ({issue}`25434`)
* Fix query failures with `EXCEEDED_LOCAL_MEMORY_LIMIT` errors due to incorrect memory accounting. ({issue}`25600`)
* Properly handle inline session properties for `EXPLAIN` queries. ({issue}`25496`)

## Security

> * Fix impersonation access control when access is granted via the role. ({issue}`25166`)

Author: @kokosing @homar, what was the failure?

Reviewer 3: It was simply an Access Deny when it should not be. Details: https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/25166

Reviewer 2: Fix incorrect access denial for access control with impersonation.

## BigQuery connector

* Add support limiting the max parallelism via the `bigquery.max-parallelism` config property. ({issue}`25422`)
* Fix queries getting stuck when reading large tables. ({issue}`25423`)

## Delta Lake connector

* Improve performance when filtering on `$path`, `$file_modified_time` and `$file_size` columns. ({issue}`25369`)
* Improve performance of scans on delta lake tables with v2 checkpoints. ({issue}`25469`)

## Hive connector

* Add support for showing column comments on Hive views. ({issue}`23845`)

> * Support multiple predicate values for injected partition columns on tables using partition projection. ({issue}`17641`)

Author: @chenjian2664 @pettyjamesm, what's an "injected partition column"?

Author: How about "Improve performance for queries involving `IN` predicates on tables using partition projection" ?

Reviewer 4: Previously those queries would be rejected (any more than a single equality value on those columns would trigger a failure) but now they succeed

Author: Got it. So, then, "Fix failure when queries involving `IN` predicates on tables using partition projection" ?

Reviewer 4: Maybe: "Add support for `IN` predicates on tables using partition projection" since the failure before was an intentional limitation of the feature

Reviewer 5: How about the "Add support for multiple predicates on partition projection columns with [injected types](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/athena/latest/ug/partition-projection-supported-types.html#partition-projection-injected-type)"
The change is specified to the injected type of partition projection, I prefer multiple predicates because:

1.  previously the query attempted to use OR with multiple values — for example, `injected_partition_projection_column = 'a' OR injected_partition_projection_column = 'b'`. This would fail because we simplify the OR conditions into an IN predicate
2. now we using `IN` predicates has it's limitation that the `injected_partition_projection_column IN (SELECT value FROM other_table)` is not supported

* Fix potential failures or incorrect results when querying partitioned tables using the OpenX JSON SerDe. ({issue}`25444`)

## Iceberg connector

* Add `system.iceberg_tables` system table to allow listing only Iceberg tables. ({issue}`25136`)

> * Add support for [deletion vectors](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#deletion-vectors). ({issue}`24457`)

Reviewer 6: Could you remove this entry because I reverted the change in #25550?

* Add support for IAM role authentication REST catalog. ({issue}`25002`)

> * Add support for lock-free commit in Hive catalog. ({issue}`25445`)

Author: @ebyhr, can you rephrase in terms of user-visible impact? If this is a performance improvement, something like "Improve performance when xxx"

Author: Wouldn't one query fail anyway? Or are we reconciling the changes and trying again when that happens?

* Add support for returning column statistics for new columns in `$partitions` system table. ({issue}`25532`)

> * Optimize manifest files by the top-level partition using the `optimize_manifests` procedure. ({issue}`25378`)

Author: @ebyhr , I don't understand what this one is about.

Reviewer 6: Previously, the procedure optimized manifest files without considering the partition spec. 

For instance, these INSERT statements create 4 manifest files:
```sql
CREATE TABLE test(a int, b int, c int) WITH (partitioning = ARRAY['b', 'c']);
INSERT INTO test VALUES (1,1,1);
INSERT INTO test VALUES (1,1,2);
INSERT INTO test VALUES (1,2,1);
INSERT INTO test VALUES (1,2,2);
```

```sql
ALTER TABLE test EXECUTE optimize_manifests;
```
The old logic rewrote to 1 manifest file.
The new logic rewrites to 2 manifest files because the top-level partition `b` has 2 values (1 or 2)

Author: What's the user-visible impact of this? Is it a bug fix? What happened with the table under the previous implementation? Was that a form of corruption (e.g, the table partitioning was not being respected)?

Reviewer 7: It's not a bug fix. We expect that this way of rewriting manifest files is more optimal as consolidating to single manifest file is potentially worse for parallelism (iceberg makes parallel read per manifest file), may have higher memory usage (iceberg loads entire manifest file result in memory) and may miss out opportunities to prune manifest file reads when query filters by partition column predicate.

# Release 475 (23 Apr 2025)

## General

* Add support for the `CORRESPONDING` clause in set operations. ({issue}`25260`)
* Add support for the `AUTO` grouping set that includes all non-aggregated columns 
  in the `SELECT` clause. ({issue}`18390`)
* Publish additional metrics for input tables in event listener. ({issue}`25475`)
* Expose dynamic filter statistics in the `QueryCompletedEvent`. ({issue}`25575`)
* Improve scalability of inline data encoding in the parallel client protocol. ({issue}`25439`)
* Improve performance of queries involving the `exclude_columns` table function. ({issue}`25117`)
* Disallow dropping the `system` catalog. ({issue}`24745`)

> * Fix occasional query failures when adaptive planning is enabled. ({issue}`25411`)

Reviewer 2: Do we have a link to adaptive planning maybe?

* Fix incorrect results when using window functions with `DISTINCT`. ({issue}`25434`)
* Fix query failures with `EXCEEDED_LOCAL_MEMORY_LIMIT` errors due to incorrect memory accounting. ({issue}`25600`)
* Properly handle inline session properties for `EXPLAIN` queries. ({issue}`25496`)

## Security

* Fix impersonation access control when access is granted via the role. ({issue}`25166`)

## JDBC driver

> * Avoid query cancellation while the client is fetching results. ({issue}`25267`)

Reviewer 2: Maybe 

```suggestion
* Avoid query cancellation when the client is fetching results. ({issue}`25267`)
```

## CLI

> * Avoid query cancellation while the client is fetching results. ({issue}`25267`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Avoid query cancellation when the client is fetching results. ({issue}`25267`)
```

## Clickhouse connector

* Add support for Clickhouse's `bool` type. ({issue}`25130`)

## BigQuery connector

> * Add support limiting the max parallelism via the `bigquery.max-parallelism` config property. ({issue}`25422`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add support for limiting the max parallelism with the `bigquery.max-parallelism` configuration property. ({issue}`25422`)
```

* Fix queries getting stuck when reading large tables. ({issue}`25423`)

## Delta Lake connector

* Allow cross-region data retrieval when using the S3 native filesystem. ({issue}`25200`)
* Add support for all storage classes when using the S3 native filesystem for writes. ({issue}`25435`)

> * Improve performance when filtering on `$path`, `$file_modified_time` and `$file_size` columns. ({issue}`25369`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Improve performance when filtering on `$path`, `$file_modified_time` or `$file_size` columns. ({issue}`25369`)
```

> * Improve performance of scans on delta lake tables with v2 checkpoints. ({issue}`25469`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Improve performance of scans on Delta Lake tables with v2 checkpoints. ({issue}`25469`)
```

* Add support for multiple predicates on partition projection columns with [injected types](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/athena/latest/ug/partition-projection-supported-types.html#partition-projection-injected-type). ({issue}`17641`)
* Fix potential failures or incorrect results when querying partitioned tables using the OpenX JSON SerDe. ({issue}`25444`)
* Ensure Hive metastore locks are released if a failure occurs during lock acquisition. ({issue}`25380`)
* Rename `hive.s3.storage-class-filter` to `hive.s3-glacier-filter` to better reflect its purpose. ({issue}`25633`)
* Fix incorrect results when reading timestamp values with leading or trailing spaces using the Regex and 
  OpenX JSON table deserializers. ({issue}`25442`)
* Fix potential performance regression when reading ORC data. ({issue}`25617`)

## Iceberg connector

* Allow cross-region data retrieval when using the S3 native filesystem. ({issue}`25200`)
* Add support for all storage classes when using the S3 native filesystem for writes. ({issue}`25435`)
* Add `system.iceberg_tables` system table to allow listing only Iceberg tables. ({issue}`25136`)

> * Add support for IAM role authentication REST catalog. ({issue}`25002`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add support for IAM role authentication for the REST catalog. ({issue}`25002`)
```

or with the

* Add support for returning column statistics for new columns in `$partitions` system table. ({issue}`25532`)
* Optimize manifest files by the top-level partition using the `optimize_manifests` procedure. ({issue}`25378`)
* Clean up old snapshots when refreshing a materialized view. ({issue}`25343`)
* Set Glue catalog ID when `hive.metastore.glue.catalogid` is configured. ({issue}`25511`)
* Fix failure when executing `migrate` on tables partitioned on columns with special characters. ({issue}`25228`)
* Fix `OPTIMIZE` failures due to commit conflicts with certain `DELETE` queries. ({issue}`25584`)
* Fix failure when analyzing a table without any snapshots. ({issue}`25563`)

## Memory connector

* Fix incorrect memory usage accounting for truncated tables. ({issue}`25564`)

## MySQL connector

* Add support for creating tables with a primary key. ({issue}`24930`)

## PostgreSQL connector

* Add support for MERGE when `retry_policy` is set to `TASK`. ({issue}`24467`)
* Add support for `array(uuid)` type. ({issue}`25557`)

## SQL Server connector

* Fix incorrect results for queries involving `LIKE` on columns with case-insensitive collations. ({issue}`25488`)

## SPI

> * Remove LazyBlock. ({issue}`25255`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Remove use of the `LazyBlock` class. ({issue}`25255`)
```
